Business analytics is the process of transforming data into insights to improve business decisions. Data management, data visualization, predictive modeling, data mining, forecasting simulation, and optimization are some of the tools used to create insights from data. Yet, while business analytics leans heavily on statistical, quantitative, and operational analysis, developing data visualizations to present your findings and shape business decisions is the end result. For this reason, balancing your technical background with strong communication skills is imperative to do well in this field.
At its core, business analytics involves a combination of the following:

identifying new patterns and relationships with data mining;
using quantitative and statistical analysis to design business models;
conducting A/B and multi-variable testing based on findings;
forecasting future business needs, performance, and industry trends with predictive modeling; and
communicating your findings in easy-to-digest reports to colleagues, management, and customers.

According to a 2020 NewVantage Partners report, 64.8% of Fortune 1000 companies surveyed have invested at least $50 million into their business analytics efforts, and 91.5% attempted to implement artificial intelligence (AI)-based technologies in some form. While these figures appear to illustrate progress, the other side of the coin is only 14.6% of all responding businesses used these technologies across their operations.

Beyond the technologies and capabilities themselves, making accurate decisions based on facts and past performance remains at the core of business analytics. As the counterpart to this, decisions relying on gut instinct (or, until roughly a decade ago, limited data) result in costly investments, be it strictly in terms of money or the hours put into developing new initiatives that go nowhere.

Within this general framework, the insights gleaned ultimately help optimize and streamline business processes, eliminating any estimates and grey areas in the process. Thus, organization-wide optimization may encompass:

shaping and evaluating future company decisions based on the performance of past initiatives or market trends;
examining individual departments’ performance within an organization and influencing their growth efforts;
monitoring employees’ performance and productivity;
determining current and future staffing needs and the market skills needed to perform these roles effectively;
assessing and predicting how well potential investments will perform;
identifying demand for a particular product or service based on market trends and consumer behavior;
scheduling release dates for new products and media;
evaluating product sales by location, and using that information to meet future customer demands;
creating optimal logistics routes for shipping and delivering merchandise;
making product recommendations based on customers’ past search habits;
gathering data from vehicles and equipment to improve future performance; and
identifying potential growth opportunities for a business, and how these scenarios could play out.
Beyond these more broad concepts, here are how some of these scenarios may unfold:

Amazon.com turns sales data into insights by analyzing millions of purchases to find customers like you and predict products you might buy.
General Electric can predict in advance from its sensor data when engine maintenance is needed.
Based on a survey you filled out, Disney can alert its servers, via your MagicBand, that you prefer a booth to a table and that your favorite character is Minnie Mouse. When you arrive, you are seated at a booth, and Minnie makes it a point to visit you at lunch.
